Documentation - Prehashed (#87)
cardano-scaling/alba: docs/rustdoc/prehashing.md

For this construction, the random functions are as follows:
- $H_0: ~~$ a random function, generating a uniformly random value in $\[n_p\]$.
- $H_1: ~~$ a random function, generating a uniformly random value in $\[n_p\]$.
- $H_2: ~~$ A random function returning $1$ with probability $q$, applied as a final test to determine if a tuple qualifies as a valid proof.

## Protocol
- The prover precomputes hash values for each element $s \in S_p$ using $H_0$, assigning each element to the "bin" numbered $H_0(s)$.
- A sequence is similarly associated to a bin, by hashing the sequence with $H_1$.
- These precomputed "bins" show how a sequence can be extended, the "balls" in the bins being the potential extension of the sequence.
- The prover starts constructing sequences from $t \in 1, \ldots, d$ and aims to build sequences of length $u$.
- When constructing sequences, the prover selects elements directly from the current bin to extend the sequence, continuing this process until the sequence reaches the required length $u$.
- After constructing a sequence of length $u$, the prover validates it with $H_2$. The sequence is a valid proof if $H_2(t, s_1, \dots, s_u) = 1$.

> The precomputed $H_0$ values enable quick checks to see if a new element can extend a sequence, based on whether $H_1(t, s_1, \dots, s_k)$ matches $H_0(s_{k+1})$.

Reviewer: "The values precomputed with $H_0$" perhaps?
"based on whether $H_1(t, s_1, \dots, s_k)$ matches the bin with label $H_0(s_{k+1})$"?

- **Proof length** $u = 3$
- **Search width** $d = 2$ (i.e., $t \in \{1, 2\}$)
---
> **Step 1:** Prehash the elements with $H_0$.
> - The prover precomputes $H_0(s)$ for all elements in $S_p$, assigning each element to a bin:
>   - $H_0(A) = 1$
>   - $H_0(B) = 2$
>   - $H_0(C) = 1$
>   - $H_0(D) = 4$
>   - $H_0(E) = 4$
> - Bins are grouped as follows:
>   - $\mathsf{bin_1}$: $\[A, C\]$
>   - $\mathsf{bin_2}$: $\[B\]$
>   - $\mathsf{bin_3}$: $\emptyset$
>   - $\mathsf{bin_4}$: $\[D, E\]$
> ---
> **Step 2:** Proof construction for $t = 1$.
> - The prover starts with $t = 1$ and attempts to construct a valid sequence of length $u = 3$.
> - Depth $k = 1$:
>   - Compute $H_1(1)$ to determine the first bin to explore.
>     - Assume $H_1(1) = 1$, so the prover looks in bin 1.
>   - $\mathsf{bin_1}$: $\[A, C\]$
>     - Extend the sequence with $s_1 = A$.
>   - Current sequence: $(t, s_1) = (1, A)$.
> - Depth $k = 2$:
>   - Compute $H_1(t, s_1)$ to determine the next bin to explore.
>     - Assume $H_1(1, A) = 3$, so the prover looks in bin 3.
>   - $\mathsf{bin_3}$: $\emptyset$
>     - No valid $s_2$ can be selected.
> - Backtracking for $t = 1$:

> >   - After exhausting all possible sequences for $t = 1$, no valid proof is found.

Reviewer: Are you implying here that `C` doesn't work?

>   - The prover backtracks and tries $t = 2$.
> ---
> **Step 3:** Proof construction for $t = 2$.
> - Depth $k = 1$:
>   - Compute $H_1(2)$ to determine the first bin to explore.
>     - Assume $H_1(2) = 4$, so the prover looks in bin 4.
>   - $\mathsf{bin_4}$: $\[D, E\]$
>     - Extend the sequence with $s_1 = D$.
>   - Current sequence: $(t, s_1) = (2, D)$.
> - Depth $k = 2$:
>   - Compute $H_1(t, s_1)$ to determine the next bin to explore.
>     - Assume $H_1(2, D) = 2$, so the prover looks in bin 2.
>   - $\mathsf{bin_2}$: $\[B\]$
>     - Extend the sequence with $s_2 = B$.
>   - Current sequence: $(t, s_1, s_2) = (2, D, B)$.
> - Depth $k = 3$:
>   - Compute $H_1(2, s_1, s_2)$ to determine the next bin to explore.
>     - Assume $H_1(2, D, B) = 1$, so the prover looks in bin 1.
>   - $\mathsf{bin_1}$: $\[A, C\]$

> >     - Extend the sequence with $s_3 = C$.

Reviewer 2: Why do we extend with C, not A?

>   - Current sequence: $(t, s_1, s_3, s_3) = (2, D, B, C)$.
> ---
> **Step 4:** Final Validation.
> - A tuple with size $u = 3$ is obtained: $(t, s_1, s_2, s_3) = (2, D, B, C)$.
> - If $H_2(2, D, B, C) = 1$, the sequence is valid, and the prover outputs it as proof.
---

## Functions
#### Proving
---
> $\mathsf{Prove}(S_p) \rightarrow \pi$
> - Input:
>   - $S_p:~~$ `prover_set`, a set of elements to be proven.
> - Output:
>   - $\pi:~~$ `proof`, a valid proof $(t, s_1, \ldots, s_u)$ or $\bot$.
> ---
> - $bins \leftarrow$ { }

> > - **for** each $~~ i \in \[1,~ n_p\]:$

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing. Here `[ ]` denotes an interval, but above for bins it denoted a list or a set. Suggest to use for bins either `( )` if it's a list or `{ }` if it's a set.

> >   - $bins\[i\] \leftarrow \[~\]$

Reviewer 2: should we use () to denote a sequence here as well?

>   - $\pi \leftarrow \mathsf{DFS}(t, \[~\], bins)$
>   - **if** $~~ \pi ~!= \bot:$
>     - **return** $~~ \pi.$
> - **return** $~~ \bot.$
---
#### Depth fist search
---
> $\mathsf{DFS}(t, slist, S_p) \rightarrow \pi$
> - Input:
>   - $t:~~$ `search_counter`, index of the current subtree being searched.
>   - $slist:~~$ `element_sequence`, candidate element sequence.
>   - $bins:~~$ `bins`, a hash-based partition of $S_p$ elements.
> - Output:
>   - $\pi:~~$ `proof`, a valid proof $(t, s_1, \ldots, s_u)$ or $\bot$.
> ---
> - **if** $~~ \mathsf{len}(slist) == u:$
>   - **if** $~~ \mathsf{H_2}(t, slist) == 1:$
>     - $\pi \leftarrow (t, slist)$
>     - **return** $~~ \pi.$
>   - **return** $~~ \bot.$
> - $ind \leftarrow \mathsf{H_1}(t, slist)$
> - **for** each $~~ s \in bins\[ind\]:$
>   - $slist_{new} \leftarrow slist \cup \[s\]$
>   - $\pi \leftarrow \mathsf{DFS}(t, slist_{new}, bins)$
>   - **if** $~~ \pi ~!= \bot:$
>     - **return** $~~ \pi.$
> - **return** $~~ \bot.$
---
#### Verification
---
> $\mathsf{Verify}(\pi) \rightarrow 0/1$
>
> - Input:
>   - $\pi:~~$ `proof`, a proof of the form $(t, s_1, \ldots, s_u)$.
> - Output:
>   - $0/1$.
> ---

> > - **if** $~~ t ~∉ \[d\]:$

Reviewer 2: If we are using notation `[d]` here, we can also use it everywhere else instead of `[1, x]`.

# Telescope - Construction with Prehashing

**Construction with Prehashing** optimizes the basic Telescope ALBA protocol by reducing the computational cost of checking sequences.
Here, a sequence means an ordered set of elements or tuples that meet certain hash conditions in the protocol.
In the basic approach, we would attempt to extend a given sequence "blindly" with all elements of $S_p$. 
Finding the correct extension required multiple invocations of the random oracle $H_1$, which could be computationally expensive.
Instead, in the **prehashing technique**, we filter the elements to extend a sequence with. 

> We do so by precomputing hash values using a new oracle $H_0$ before running the DFS algorithm, and associating each element and bin with these.

Reviewer: If you rewrite line 8 with this content, you could remove line 9 to 12 included.

- Proof tuples are constructed using the prehashed elements rather than the original set.

### Core components
The construction with prehashing retains the same parameters as described in basic construction. 
Additionally, it incorporates a new hash function $H_0$, specifically introduced for prehashing the elements of the set $S_p$.
For this construction, the random functions are as follows:
- $H_0: ~~$ a random function, generating a uniformly random value in $\[n_p\]$.
- $H_1: ~~$ a random function, generating a uniformly random value in $\[n_p\]$.
- $H_2: ~~$ A random function returning $1$ with probability $q$, applied as a final test to determine if a tuple qualifies as a valid proof.

## Protocol
- The prover precomputes hash values for each element $s \in S_p$ using $H_0$, assigning each element to the "bin" numbered $H_0(s)$.
- A sequence is similarly associated to a bin, by hashing the sequence with $H_1$.
- These precomputed "bins" show how a sequence can be extended, the "balls" in the bins being the potential extension of the sequence.

> - When constructing sequences, the prover selects elements directly from the current bin to extend the sequence, continuing this process until the sequence reaches the required length $u$.

Reviewer: Perhaps switch this line with line 33 (so that we have sequence init, sequence extension and sequence finalization... in a sequence :p)?

> ---
> - The prover precomputes $H_0(s)$ for all elements in $S_p$, assigning each element to a bin:
>   - $H_0(A) = 2$
>   - $H_0(B) = 1$
>   - $H_0(C) = 2$
>   - $H_0(D) = 3$
> - Bins are grouped as follows:
>   - Bin 1: $\{B\}$
>   - Bin 2: $\{A, C\}$
>   - Bin 3: $\{D\}$
> ---
> - The prover starts with $t = 1$ and attempts to construct a valid sequence of length $u = 3$ using bounded DFS.
> - Depth $k = 1$:
>   - Compute $H_1(1)$ to determine the first bin to explore.
>     - Assume $H_1(1) = 2$, so the prover looks in bin 2.
>   - Select $s_1 = A$ from bin 2.
>     - Compute $H_1(1, A)$ to check where to explore next.
>     - $H_1(1, A)$ takes the current sequence $(1, A)$ and outputs the bin index for the next step.
>     - Assume $H_1(1, A) = 3$, meaning the prover should explore bin 3.
> - Depth $k = 2$:
>   - Look in bin 3, which contains $\{D\}$.
>   - Select $s_2 = D$.
>   - Compute $H_1(1, A, D)$ to check where to explore next.
>     - Assume $H_1(1, A, D) = 1$, meaning the prover should explore bin 1.
> - Depth $k = 3$ (Final Element):
>   - Look in bin 1, which contains $\{B\}$.
>   - Select $s_3 = B$.

> >   - Compute $H_1(1, A, D, B)$ to check if this sequence can proceed further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>   - Compute $H_2(1, A, D, B)$ to check if this sequence can proceed further.
```

> >     - Assume $H_1(1, A, D, B) = 3$, which indicates a mismatch with the required condition. The sequence is invalid.

Reviewer: We shouldn't have this check. Now that we have u=3 elements, we directly check with H2=1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>     - Assume $H_2(1, A, D, B) = 0$, which indicates a mismatch with the required condition. The sequence is invalid.
```

> - Backtracking for $t = 1$:
>   - After exhausting all possible sequences for $t = 1$, no valid proof is found.
>   - The prover backtracks and tries other combinations of $s_1$, $s_2$, and $s_3$.
> - Step 3: Retry with $t = 2$
>   - The prover now starts the process for $t = 2$.
> - Depth $k = 1$:
>   - Compute $H_1(2)$ to determine the first bin.
>     - Assume $H_1(2) = 1$, so the prover looks in bin 1.
>   - Select $s_1 = B$.
>   - Compute $H_1(2, B)$ to check where to explore next.
>     - Assume $H_1(2, B) = 2$, meaning the prover should explore bin 2.
> - Depth $k = 2$:
>   - Look in bin 2, which contains $\{A, C\}$.
>   - Select $s_2 = A$.
>   - Compute $H_1(2, B, A)$ to check where to explore next.
>     - Assume $H_1(2, B, A) = 3$, meaning the prover should explore bin 3.
> - Depth $k = 3$ (Final Element):
>   - Look in bin 3, which contains $\{D\}$.
>   - Select $s_3 = D$.

> >   - Compute $H_1(2, B, A, D)$ to check if this sequence is valid so far.

Reviewer: We shouldn't have this check (H1 is only used to extend), line 123 to 126 can be removed

> ---
> - $bins \leftarrow$ { }
> - **for** each $~~ i \in \[1,~ n_p\]:$
>   - $bins\[i\] \leftarrow \[~\]$
> - **for** each $~~ s \in S_p:$
>   - $ind \leftarrow \mathsf{H_0}(s)$
>   - $bins\[ ind \] \leftarrow bins\[ ind \] \cup \[s\]$
> - **for** each $~~ t \in \[1,~ d\]:$
>   - $\pi \leftarrow \mathsf{DFS}(t, \[~\], bins)$
>   - **if** $~~ \pi ~!= \bot:$
>     - **return** $~~ \pi.$
> - **return** $~~ \bot.$
---

#### Depth fist search
---
> $\mathsf{DFS}(t, slist, S_p) \rightarrow \pi$
> - Input:
>   - $t:~~$ `search_counter`, index of the current subtree being searched.
>   - $slist:~~$ `element_sequence`, candidate element sequence.
>   - $bins:~~$ `bins`, a hash-based partition of $S_p$ elements.
> - Output:
>   - $\pi:~~$ `proof`, a valid proof $(t, s_1, \ldots, s_u)$ or $\bot$.
> ---
> - **if** $~~ \mathsf{len}(slist) == u:$
>   - **if** $~~ \mathsf{H_2}(t, slist) == 1:$
>     - $\pi \leftarrow (t, slist)$
>     - **return** $~~ \pi.$
>   - **return** $~~ \bot.$
> - $bin_{current} \leftarrow \mathsf{H_1}(t, slist)$
> - **for** each $~~ s \in bins\[bin_{current}\]:$
>   - $slist_{new} \leftarrow slist \cup \[s\]$

> >   - **if** $~~ \mathsf{H_1}(t, slist_{new}) == 1:$

Reviewer: Here is your confusion! :)
There is no such check
